Apple shares dip after company warns of a possible $8 billion hit from supply constraints
PUBLISHED THU, APR 28 20223:39 PM EDTUPDATED THU, APR 28 20228:30 PM EDT
thumbnail
Kif Leswing
@KIFLESWING
WATCH LIVE
KEY POINTS
Apple’s revenue grew nearly 9% year over year during the quarter ended in March.
But shares fell nearly 4% in extended trading after Apple CFO Luca Maestri warned of challenges in the current quarter, including supply constraints that could hurt sales by up to $8 billion.
The tech giant authorized $90 billion in share buybacks.
In this article

AAPL
+0.12 (+0.08%)
After Hours


Follow your favorite stocks
CREATE FREE ACCOUNT
Apple beats earnings and revenueWATCH NOW
VIDEO00:42
Apple beats earnings and revenue
Apple
’s revenue grew nearly 9% year over year in the quarter ended in March, the company said on Thursday, showing strong growth and bucking investor worries about a deteriorating macroeconomic environment affecting demand for high-end smartphones and computers. 

But Apple shares fell nearly 4% in extended trading after Apple CFO Luca Maestri warned of several challenges in the current quarter, including supply constraints related to Covid-19 that could hurt sales by between $4 billion and $8 billion. The tech giant also warned that demand in China was being sapped by Covid-related lockdowns.

RELATED INVESTING NEWS
Buy this Big Tech stock now given its 'attractive' entry point, says portfolio manager
CNBC Pro
Buy this Big Tech stock now given its ‘attractive’ entry point, says portfolio manager
3 DAYS AGO
Apple CEO Tim Cook added the company was “not immune” to supply chain challenges.

Here’s how Apple did versus Refinitiv consensus estimates:  

EPS: $1.52 vs. $1.43 estimated 
Revenue: $97.28 billion vs. $93.89 billion estimated, up 8.59% year over year 
iPhone revenue: $50.57 billion vs. $47.88 billion estimated, up 5.5% year over year 
Services revenue: $19.82 billion vs. $19.72 billion estimated, up 17.28% year over year 
Other Products revenue: $8.81 billion vs. $9.05 billion estimated, up 12.37% year over year 
Mac revenue: $10.44 billion vs. $9.25 billion estimated, up 14.73% year over year 
iPad revenue: $7.65 billion vs. $7.14 billion estimated, down 1.92% year over year 
Gross margin: 43.7% vs. 43.1% estimated 
Apple did not provide a forecast for the current quarter — the company hasn’t provided official revenue guidance since February 2020, citing uncertainty tied to the pandemic.  

In addition, Apple said that its board of directors authorized $90 billion in share buybacks, maintaining its pace as the public company that spends the most buying its own shares. It spent $88.3 billion on buybacks in 2021, according to S&P Dow Jones Indices.  

Stock picks and investing trends from CNBC Pro:
Aggressive central bank easing will return within 18 months, CIO says, naming stocks to buy

These favored stocks are down by more than 20% and are poised to pop soon, says Morgan Stanley

Hedge funds are amassing short bets on these winning stocks, according to Goldman

Apple increased its dividend by 5% to 23 cents per share. 

The smartphone business grew over 5% during the quarter, yielding more evidence that the current iPhone 13 model is selling well.  

Cook said that the iPhone business had a successful quarter with sales to so-called switchers, or people who previously had an Android phone but decided to buy an iPhone.  

“We had a record level of upgraders during the quarter and we grew switchers, strong double digits,” Cook told CNBC’s Steve Kovach. 

The earnings beat also suggests that Apple’s premium smartphone business may be insulated from concerns about deteriorating consumer confidence. The increase in sales also came despite a difficult year-over-year iPhone comparison, since the new iPhones were launched earlier in 2021.  

“It’s clearly a strong cycle,” Cook said. 

This was a Tom Brady-like quarter for Apple, says Wedbush Securities Dan IvesWATCH NOW
VIDEO03:39
This was a Tom Brady-like quarter for Apple, says Wedbush Securities Dan Ives
Elsewhere, Mac computers continued to grow strongly after Apple transitioned its lineup to use its own M1 chips instead of Intel processors. Sales were up nearly 15% year over year to $10.44 billion.  

However, Apple’s iPad business continues to go sideways, with sales down 2.1% from a year ago, despite updated models with Apple’s M1 chip. Cook said the iPad business had “very significant supply constraints” during the quarter. 

Apple’s profitable services business, which includes subscriptions, licensing fees, and extended warranties, continues to grow strongly with over 17% growth. However, over the past two years the business had made a habit of beating Wall Street expectations by between 3% and over 8%, and this quarter, it only exceeded Refinitiv estimates by 0.51%. 

“The [services] comps are a bit strange during Covid, because we’ve had lockdowns and then reopenings and so on,” Maestri said in an interview with CNBC, adding that during some periods in the last two years that “digital content went through the roof.”

Cook said that Apple’s financial performance was “better than we anticipated.” The fastest-growing region was the Americas, which saw sales rise 20% during the quarter to $50.57 billion. Greater China, which includes Hong Kong and Taiwan, grew at a slower 3.47% rate to $18.34 billion. Cook said Covid-related China lockdowns didn’t affect Apple during the quarter, however.  